In this lesson as promised we'll be populating the sidebar of the chat application.
Up top we're gonna show the name of the room the current user is in and we're also going to show a list
of all of the users in that room and that list will automatically update as users come and go.
Now we've already done all of the heavy lifting in order to get this done.
We're already tracking when users come and go and inside of users dot J S we already created a function
that allows us to fetch a list of users by the room name.
So all we really need to do is emit a new event from the server to the client when the room list changes.
When's that going to happen.
It's going to happen when someone joins and down below what's going to happen when someone leaves.
So let's go ahead and actually knock that out.
We're gonna start right here.
So we welcome the user.
We then send a message saying the new user has joined.
Then we're going to use I O dot to to send something to everyone in that room including the new user
right here.
I O dot to user dot room and we are going to emit a new event.
Now we could call this whatever we want to.
I'm going to call it something like Room data.
We're going to send two pieces of data in an object.
We are going to send a list of all of the users and we're going to send the room name.
So right here let's do that room is going to come from user dot room then down below.
I could call users the property and the value comes from get users in room and we are going to provide
the room name.
So once again user dot room.
So this is going to make sure that the client gets all of the necessary data and we're going to do something
similar down below.
When someone leaves.
So right here we're only ever adding users down below.
Let's go ahead and do just the opposite.
So when someone disconnects and they were actually part of a room we will send that message saying that
the user has left and will also use I O dot to to send something else to that room emitting once again
our room data event and providing the same set of data.
So we have the room user room and we have that users property which comes from get users in room providing
the room name.
Perfect.
So now when users come and go the client is getting notified allowing it to keep an active list of those
names.
Let's go ahead and actually update things on the client for the moment.
Oh we're going to do is listen for this event and log it to the console once we're sure we have the
correct data.
We'll focus on rendering it to the screen.
So inside of chat dot J S we have on message on location message and just below that I'll be adding
the new call to socket dot on in this case it is on the room data event and we are going to get access
to that data right here I could destructor it getting the room name and the user's list and then down
below.
All I'm going to do is log that data out so console log room followed by console dot log users.
Now let's go ahead and test this out in its current state to make sure we're at least getting the data.
I'm gonna save all of my files and head over to the browser in the browser.
What I'm going to do is open up the console for both of these browser windows using the keyboard shortcut
for my o s.
Once again you can find that alongside of the menu option.
It's sitting right here for me.
And then what we're going to do is refresh both tabs.
So right here we are getting the new data.
And what do we have.
Well first up we have our welcome message which is great.
Then we have the name of the room.
This one being J S and this one being H2 UML.
Then we have our array of users which in this case just contains one user for each.
Let's go ahead and have the second browser window join that J asked room as well.
So I'm going to leave the room I was in.
Go back to local host three thousand.
I'll pick a new name.
I'll go ahead and use Jess and I'll have Jess join the J.S. room.
Now I would expect to see my little notification saying that Jess has joined and I'm also seeing updated
data.
Now I have an array of two users and I would be able to use this data to re render the sidebar.
So let's go ahead and actually get that done.
It's a two step process step one create the template step to render the template over in chat dot H2
you now let's go ahead and knock that template out.
So we have our main content then we have the message template followed by the location template down
below.
We're gonna go ahead and add a new one.
So we set up our script tag.
We set up our I.D. I could call this one something like side bar template and I'll also set the type
equal to text forward slash HDMI well then inside of here we'll work on creating that structure and
we're gonna start off with the room name right here that's gonna go in an H header tag and all we're
going to do is provide it like so and we'll pass this data in when we actually render the template shortly.
I'm also going to setup a class for this one to style it right here.
The class is room hyphen title down below that we'll go ahead and use an h three to render some static
text to the screen right here I'm going to render users sense we'll have the users list down below.
And there's a class for this one as well.
The class for this one is list title.
Then after that we actually provide the list.
This is going to be in a U L element which stands for unordered list right here.
We are going to expand that since we'll be adding a bit of content inside of there.
And we're also going to set up a class.
The class being users now in this case what we want to do is look at an array.
We have an array of objects.
And for each object we want to render the user name property to the HDMI all output to get that done.
We use the following syntax.
What we do is we start with two opening curly braces followed by two closing curly braces.
Then it's the hash sign or pound symbol followed by the name of that array.
So in this case the name of the array is going to end up being users.
Then we go ahead and close this off with the same thing though it is forward slash users.
So this is the syntax for opening for the array and closing everything inside is going to happen for
each element in that array.
And we have access to the data for that object.
So in this case we have an array of objects with those properties.
In this case all we want to do is use the User Name property.
So right here we're going to create a list item using a line and we're going to put that user name right
inside.
There's nothing more to it.
Now if we wanted to show other things for each user we could add those inside of here as well alongside
of our list item.
But in this case it's the only piece of information we need to render.
So we have the sidebar template we need to select it and render it in chat dot HDMI all up top.
We have our templates list.
I'll create a new constant for this one sidebar template.
And once again we're going to select it using document dot query selector grabbing it by its I.D..
And I just call that the sidebar template from there grabbing its HDL using inner HDMI.
Now we can actually render it down below in the new event listener.
We set up right here I can remove those console log calls and start by generating my compiled HDL using
mustache dot render like we've done before.
In this case we're rendering these sidebar template and we're rendering it with the following data we
have our room and we have our users.
Now from here we have the H2 UML and we can actually put it into the document where we want to show
it in our case we've created a place for this.
If you remember up top our main content has this sidebar right here.
Oh we're going to do is give this an I.D. so we can target it I can give it an I.D. of sidebar and now
we're gonna put the HDMI all right inside of there.
So inside of chat dot J S we will select that element document dot query selector selecting it by its
I.D. sidebar and rendering inside of it the H2 UML so dot inner H2 UML is going to equal the H to UML
we can piled up above.
Now with this in place we should be able to see these sidebar content.
What I'm going to do is head over to the browser making sure every single file is saved and I'll go
ahead and refresh a couple of these right here.
Now I can see unclothed section users is showing up and that is for my mustache template.
So let's take a quick look at that over inside of chat dot H2 UML.
I see that I opened users right here and I closed it down below.
The actual problem is that I forgot to provide that second closing curly brace.
So mistakes do happen and they're perfectly normal.
Right here we're just going to save our changes and try again.
So from the browser I'll go ahead and refresh both pages again.
And right here we can see we have our data showing up.
I have the chat room name for each.
And then down below that.
What do I have.
I have the list of active users now in this case it's Andrew and Jess.
But what happens if Jess leaves.
I'll go ahead and create a new tab to keep this window open when I close this tab.
I disconnect.
I see that Jess is gone from the side bar and I also have my message saying Jess has left.
So when we're tracking the users throughout their use of the chat app it makes it really easy to work
with that data with just a few lines of code.
We were able to get the list of users in a particular room back to the client so the client could render
them.
That's where we're going to stop for this one.
There are still a few more things that we want to knock out for the chat application in the next lesson.
Well we're going to focus on is auto scrolling.
So as we add more messages than what can fit on the screen the behavior gets a little nasty.
We're going to address that soon.
So let's jump right in.